Senator Keephover, face the nation.
As the Senate Committee conduct hearings on the cost of wonder drugs, you're about to
see the chairman of that committee, the former Democratic candidate for Vice President,
Senator Estes Keephover, face the nation.
In a spontaneous and unrehearsed interview with veteran correspondents from the nation's
press, Robert Roth of the Philadelphia Bulletin, Charles Von Fremde of CDS News, and Warren
Duffy of United Press International.
And now here is the moderator of face the nation, CDS News correspondent Stuart Novens.
Governor Nelson Rockefeller's withdrawal from the Republican presidential race is generally
taken as meaning that Vice President Nixon will be uncontested at the GOP convention and
that he will emerge as the Republican nominee.
This puts into even sharper focus than before the situation among the Democrats where there
is no clear cut front runner.
Senator Estes Keephover, who was the Vice Presidential nominee in 1956, or the Democratic Party,
may have some views on that situation and he's here now to face the nation.
Senator, apart from party politics, your investigation at the drug industry and major professional
sports and the fact that Congress will be coming back in about 10 days or also matters
that we'd like to discuss.
So if you would, let's take this first question from Mr. Duffy.
Well, Senator Duffy, what's wrong with Governor Rockefeller first is the one thing that
everybody is talking about here in Washington, I think, probably everywhere else in the country.
In your opinion, you feel this is going to make it easier or harder for the Democrats
to elect the President in 1960.
Mr. Duffy, I think it will make it easier and I think that his withdrawal will cause
the Democrats to fight harder to win the campaign.
I think it's unfortunate from the viewpoint of the public interest and from the Republican
party that the rank and file Republicans are not having a contest, not to be able to
decide whether they like Rockefeller better or Nixon better.
There won't be any discussion of a foreign policy and high interest rates in the Republican
ranks.
It shows that the oligarch Republicans are in complete control and Rockefeller apparently
decided he didn't have a chance.
Of course, that's not true of us Democrats.
We have a lot of fine people who are candidates.
Let me make it very clear that I have no national plans whatsoever and I'm not planning
to be one.
Senator Keifal, are our parties wide open and we do have some fine people and they'll be
running in the prime areas.
I think it would have been fine if Nixon, Mr. Nixon and Governor Rockefeller had run
in some of the prime areas to give the people a chance.
That's what we lead in this country.
Senator Keifal, have you indicated indirectly anyhow that you think that Nixon will be
easier to beat than Rockefeller?
Of course, public opinion polls ever since 1948 had been somewhat suspect but nevertheless
they do show Nixon running ahead of any of the Democratic possibilities.
I wonder why you figure that Nixon can be beaten?
Well, of course we have so many Democratic possibilities.
Our public opinion expressions are spread among several candidates whereas in the case
of Nixon, it's just been between him and Rockefeller.
Then furthermore, this is a very dangerous time when one person may decide whether we're
going to have an atomic war or not and I think his time goes on that a lot of people
wouldn't want to place that confidence in Mr. Nixon.
I think it's a nice fellow personally but I want to Democrat to be present with the United
States.
Senator, it's been said by many Democrats perhaps you agree that if Nixon is the candidate,
the Democratic Party will be more united than it would be against any other candidate.
Do you think that that's so?
I think so, Mr. Roth.
I think he's taken a very strong position against the Democratic Party from time to time.
Whereas Rockefeller was considered more of a liberal.
I think the independent voters and the liberals will unite in the Democratic Party more so
against Nixon than what against Rockefeller.
Well, it's clear enough why you're organizing.
I don't want to say that I think we have an easy sailing in this race.
I think we're going to win but it's going to be a tough contest.
Our situation in Franklin is not as good today as it was six months ago.
But I don't understand though, is why you think that Nixon's opposition will unite the Democratic
Party.
What is it that he has done as far as the rank and file of voters are concerned and independent
voters except the mean to Democrats?
Well, that's something of being mean to Democrats is something that will unite the Democrats.
But I think you go back of course it's been a long history and I don't think it's worthwhile
or probably appropriate to review that long history.
And Simon Mr. Dixon, Nixon's campaign, he's has some pretty harsh words over the United
States to say about Democrats in many various states and the Democratic rank and file and
leaders haven't forgotten.
Senator Keefe, former President Truman has had some pretty strong things to say about Republicans
over the years too.
Yes, he has, Mr. President.
Well, why is it that this is something I've never been able to understand?
Why it is that Democrats get so upset over things that Nixon says about them but they don't
get upset over the things that they say about Republicans.
Well, it's all just political give and take.
Well, Mr. Truman, of course, have had our difference.
I think in his big decisions he's been a great and good leader and I think he's growing
in statute but he's not a candidate of either part of the president.
No, but when he was a candidate he certainly had some strong things to say too.
I can recall some comments about the 80th Congress he made to a pretty strong.
But he didn't put it on a personal basis.
Senator, you yourself had some strong things to say about some Democratic candidates at
various times haven't you?
I've usually expressed myself pretty freely, Mr. Raw.
I can't remember exactly what you were talking about.
Oh, we're quite aware there.
And just a moment ago you made what I thought was very strong statement about your old
neighbor and Richard Nixon only, you two used to live close together.
You're saying it?
I'm very fond of him.
I mean, it's fine.
Are you saying that you would not trust him with such important decisions as perhaps
the decision whether or not to start a nuclear war?
I say we're in a situation where in a little accident, both sides are armed with teeth,
any accident, some misinformation might have set this war off.
And I don't mean that I wouldn't trust him.
I just don't think he has mature judgment as I would like to see in the White House.
Well, by that, don't you imply that you wouldn't trust him with these decisions that
may be in the fate of the world or the fate of the issues?
I'd rather trust someone else with more experience.
Other trust will move.
Yes, naturally.
Senator, you indicated a moment ago if I understood you correctly that the democratic situation
was worse than it was six months ago.
To what do you want to do?
Well, I'll say frankly that I think Mr. Eisenhower has done a good job on his trip around
the world.
He's created a good impression, although that's different.
That doesn't mean that the policies have been changed necessarily, but he's captured the
imagination of the people, and that's given some strength to the Republican cause and
not opinion.
And I want to say that I admire and appreciate the president for his very grueling trip.
I think he's done a whole lot.
He's brought a lot of goodwill, and I think he's contributed something toward the possibility
of having peace in the world.
Well, Senator, obviously, you can't be against peace in the world.
And I'm wondering what the issues will be then.
What are you going to carry your democratic campaign on?
Well, we'll have the issues of peace.
We'll have the issues of what our defense structure is going to be.
We'll have issues of interest rates.
We'll have the issue of foreign program, housing program, many, many domestic issues.
Whether we're going to develop our country, or whether we're going to call a halt to
building of hydroelectric facilities and building up the richness of our country, things
of that sort.
We'll have a lot of issues.
I've just been reading the advisory council's program, and so that we've got so many issues.
Senator, on the basis of those issues, which is the current Democratic hopeful who best
to remit you or your kind?
I'm not in position to say, because all of our democratic hopefuls say at the present
time that they're not candidates.
I mean, they haven't announced their candidacy.
I want to see how they're going to run into primaries.
I want to hear what they're going to say about public issues.
They're a fine group of people, but before I make any statement, if I ever do make a statement
about which one I'm going to be for, a lot of things I want to see.
I imagine the primaries will eliminate some of these democratic hopefuls.
So now which one do you think is ahead?
I'd rather not be put to that question.
I think it's a very difficult question to answer.
Senator Long, at the same line, though, they posed for whatever they were in their
suspect in many quarters.
Polls, though, show that similar to candidate today is running ahead.
But even though you are a declared non-candidate, you said that you're not running for anything
but re-electing it.
Senator, I'm telling you something.
I want to make that a must, but I want to be in Tennessee.
I don't blame you, but the fact is that even though you've been more or less out of the
national contention seen for four years, that you are still running third among the democratic
possibilities of the people in some of the polls.
I appreciate that fact.
I've been trying to get myself out of the national picture and Dr. Gallup puts me back
in there, never so often.
But the fact of the case is Mr. Duffy, the 1952 I campaigned in every nook and corner
of the United States.
I met a lot of people.
I did the same thing in 1956 so that I just know a lot of people in the country.
I appreciate their friendship and I appreciate the fact that many of them have expressed
a favorable interest in me.
But in spite of that interest, as much as I appreciated, I'm not in the national picture.
Senator, when Dr. Gallup puts you back in the national picture, do you consider that a
friendly act?
Well, that's a flattering act.
Senator, a moment ago when you were outlining what the issues of the campaign might be,
you didn't mention the issue of civil rights.
Does the fact that you are not a national candidate now, but are running for the Senate from
a Southern state, have anything to do with it?
I didn't intend to admit it.
I don't know exactly how the different democratic and the Republican Party will stand on that
particular issue.
As far as I'm concerned, I'm all in favor of doing everything we can to secure the right
of people to vote and try to be thoughtful of the rights of all of our people, regardless
of rates or religion.
On a federal level?
Yes, on a federal level.
And I vote side each issue as it comes up.
We do have, and I voted for the extension of the civil rights commission.
It may be that on some issues, we ought to wait and see what they recommend, see what
the findings they have, maybe we don't have enough information.
I think an impunity of legislation against the South that make matters worse than they already
are, have been doing the good.
Unless an unexpected settlement should develop between labor and management on the steel
front, it looks like this is going to be a major issue before the Congress when it comes
back.
If no agreement is reached, do you think that Congress will pass some remedial legislation?
On-prem, that's a very distressing situation, this steel strike, and I think the 80 days
expires about January 20th.
Certainly Congress will have to do something about it if the strike continues on.
I just what we'll be able to do will not be satisfactory to anybody.
None of us will like labor courts, none of us like compulsory arbitration, and yet we can
afford to see the economy of the country ground to a halt.
Senator Smathers, I believe, suggested some kind of labor court.
Whatever's done, I hope will be in a temporary basis and only a prior to those industries
vested with a public interest.
So do you, Senator?
I hope in that connection also that the viewpoint of the consumer will be considered.
We've had an increase in productivity and the steel industry between three and four percent
for the last few years.
That increase has been divided between industry and labor without the consumer getting much
benefit in the way of reduced prices.
I want somebody, if we're going to have some method of settlement or some formula to consider
the consumer, the purchaser of steel also.
Doesn't that get you into price fixing on a government level?
Well, I don't like price fixing, but of course, if we're not going to have statesmanship
and consideration on the part of industry and labor to get this strike over with, we're
going to have to do something about it, but the solution will be, I don't know.
No, but you feel that if labor and management can't get together on this, with an equitable
relationship to the consumer, that the government will have to get in.
They're going to have to do something because our defense effort, our rockets, missiles,
guns, planes, everything that we're doing depends upon having steel.
We've got to have supply of steel.
Generally, you're a subcommittee, which is the Senate antitrust and monopolist subcommittee
has held rather extensive hearings on this steel situation over the years on the possible
antitrust aspects of it, price fixing and expectation.
But have you ever recommended any specific legislation?
Now, you're talking now about legislation may be needed.
We made some specific recommendations along the line that I've talked about that first
place that there should have been a fact-finding commission early in the game.
The Secretary of the President should have used the force of his office at a long time
ago to try to get the parties to settle this strike on a patriotic basis.
Third, that the productivity gains should be, and that the consumer ought to be considered
in connection with it.
And of course, Senator Olmani has a price notification bill, which he's been sponsoring
before our subcommittee.
We also have legislation to have pre-notice of merger.
And there are good many proposals that are come indirectly from our steel hearings, which
are now before the Congress.
So that same subcommittee in the years has been also lacking into another field of interest
that right now is particularly timely, I think, because short time from now, a lot of Americans
are going to be very much interested in this professional football playoff between the
Baltimore Colts and the Democrats.
I think you're not both like me or the Baltimore of the afternoon.
Yeah, my son wanted to go over there very much.
I'd like to go with it.
Very disappointed.
But I was asking you something.
Do you feel that the major sports industries, and I'm referring mainly to Major League
Baseball and Major League Football, have so far complied with the promises that they
gave to your subcommittee hearings last year?
I'm specifically asking Senator about Major League Baseball right now because I recall
they came in and they gave your subcommittee what I thought was a pretty firm promise.
They would cooperate with the formation of a third.
They would leave you under the league.
That's right.
Do you feel that they've complied with that promise?
My personal feeling is that they have not come through like they ought to.
They've got to loosen up.
They give up some of their contracts, some of their player contracts.
I have been informed that the sponsors of the new Continental League have been having
a very difficult time breaking loose any contracts.
I'm not pretty obvious to any read of the fourth phase.
But we'll have some more hearings about it later.
We'll have more hearings.
Yes, we will have some more.
You have raised a very difficult point.
It would seem to me being a bit of a sports fan myself.
Having the present clubs give up the contracts, the players to this third league.
Who would determine how players contracts would be shifted to another team and another league?
Well, I've been hoping that they would do it themselves.
They would see the necessity of the fact that the American people want another league.
They want more teams.
What would you expect the New York Yankees to say give up a Mickey Mantle or a...
Well, maybe not Mickey, but maybe somebody else.
They've got 450 or 500 contracts that they control.
A lot of these people are formed out.
They're actually playing.
They're as limited to 40 players.
It's not the same line before we leave sports.
You feel that the football people and other late-virt Bell made a promise.
In fact, you made the announcement that he was going to cooperate with the formation of a second
major professional football league.
Apparently, that's going to be more successful.
You feel that they have more...
I think Mr. Bell and the others in football
feel have tried to cooperate.
But there again, I don't have any immediate information.
But you will have more hearing.
Yes, we will have more hearing.
We have some bills pending, and I have to definitely earn more.
Senator, referring to another investigation that you're currently conducting,
one into the cost of drugs and special pharmaceutical preparation,
evidence before your committee has seen to indicate that the price is charged
to the consumer or excessive.
The...
In some cases, your figures have been disputed, but assuming that the figures are correct,
eventually what is your committee proposed to do about it?
Well, Mr. Ross, may I...
Oh, may I just lay prices, or how do you...
May I?
May I give you just a brief summary about what our committee has found so far.
We've been studying, of course, the steroid hormones, which is the very wonderful...
And wondered drug is used in the treatment of people who suffer from arthritis,
heart-as-zone and misterivities.
We find the first place that...
That there are prices in England, for instance, says...
Seven cents, seven and a half cents a pill to the drugist.
In this country, almost 18 cents a pill.
We find also that the raw material after being tested and put in tablet form and bottled
at the prices are less than two cents a pill, two cents a tablet, whereas the charge
on almost 18 cents to the drugist.
We find also, since the hearing that we've had that some small companies are actually selling
the drugists, these same pills, which meet USP specifications for less than two cents a
pill.
We find also that the drug industry is the highest in the profit field, considering that worth
of any industry in the United States.
I have a chart here that shows that very graphically.
There's drugs after taxes, about 22 percent, all manufacturing, generally, about 11 percent.
And you will see motor vehicles and soap and petroleum, all of them are very much under
drugs.
And these are medicines that people have to have.
And I also see that in case of shearing and the same is true of up-john and work than
we have had before our committee, but they made enough profits in four years to repay the
net worth of their corporations during those four years.
We find also, strangely enough, that, for instance, in 1959 shearing was bidding to the
government, the M-M-S-A, the Military Medical Supply Agency, for 23 cents a thousand capsules
of pills, whereas they were selling the same to the drugists for $170.
The Senator Keith over the crowd, why that should be?
I don't know.
So I only conclude that I can reach, and the inevitable conclusion is that among these
big companies there just isn't any competition.
They've got their prices way up.
The other thing is that the small companies can are making and selling the same product
for about two and a half or three cents a capsule, whereas the big companies are charging
almost 18.
Senator, if you'll forgive me for pointing it out.
I don't think you answered the question.
I was wrong, Vass.
What are you going to do about it?
The question is too early to say exactly what legislation that we might recommend, but
the harassed doctor with all the detailed information advertising and the medical journals that
he gets is only natural that he wants to prescribe some drug, dealt with that trade name
that he has confidence in.
Well, the government and the veterans' administration has confidence in these little companies, and
they buy them for a thuzard and a water read.
So we must have asked some way so that the government, so that the private position will
have confidence and will be willing to recommend the drugs of these small companies too, then
we'll have real competition.
But you already have government supervision of any drugs of that nature.
Yes, we have the USP standards, and they're standards with teeth in them.
But the medical profession generally feels that they want their physicians to get something
that they're absolutely sure of its efficacy and its quality.
And so, and then they're given a lot of information about these detailed people.
So they use to recommend by the trade name of the high price of the high price.
Would you eliminate the trade name?
No, I wouldn't eliminate the trade name.
And how do you meet the...
Some people, some people have actually recommended that since this is a captive group, that is
the patient is captive, he has no alternative.
He has to take a prescription that the doctor recommends that there ought to be price controls.
I hope you don't have to get to that.
I hope we can find some other method of getting competition and get the prices down, of course,
they certainly ought to come down.
Senator, how do you meet the contention of the pharmaceutical houses that is there independent
research that has developed many of these new drugs and that the profit incentive is what
has spread them to do it?
Do you want to remove the large profit incentive?
No, I want them to have a profit incentive.
But I submit that 22% after taxes is a pretty high profit.
Other manufacturers seem to get along on 11% after taxes generally.
Well, so they've been in the same way.
The situation is this.
So they have done a lot of fine research and I think some of these big drug houses are
fine organizations.
But it just doesn't make sense.
It's upside down economy for them to be selling the pill at almost 18 cents, a tablet almost
18 cents like Pregnant Zone, whereas a small company and many of them do fine research
themselves.
They sell the same pill, tablet, meeting US peace specifications, or less than two cents.
So even if you found in your subcommittee in your opinion that these people are charging
too much and perhaps they're probably not agree with you.
But unless you found evidence of collusion and price fixing, do you think that the Congress
ought to be in the price fixing business?
It's not a matter of fixing prices, Mr. Duffy.
What we are interested in is why does it happen that the prices of these drugs are
really big companies always wind up exactly the same and very, very high.
Why is there no competition?
What can we do to get competition between them?
But you're suggesting that there's some kind of violation of the antitrust laws.
Don't we have a mechanism now established to handle that sort of thing?
Well, the antitrust laws need to be remodeled with great deal.
There's also this additional problem.
The issuance of patents.
We found that in the prednisone, for instance, that five of the big companies were trying
to tie up the market for the future, even though no patent had actually been issued.
So that if a patent is issued, the little companies would have to buy in finished form and
boxes couldn't buy in bulk anymore and they would be put out of business and they'd
be unable to sell with these low prices.
Senator Keith Oliver, a moment ago you made a passing reference to detail men and possibly
some people in our audience aren't aware of what you were talking about.
As I understand it, detail men work for the drug companies such as Murkup, John, Sherring
and so forth.
And it is their job to go to the doctors and explain to the doctors the latest drugs they have,
how they can be used and in some cases even give them samples of it.
Now, we heard testimony before your group that a lot of doctors are appreciative of this
service and they are for the detail men.
Would you do away with the detail men?
I think we still need some detail men, although I think the matter has been carried entirely
too far.
So, in a sense, one third of the price that the drug store pays for the drug goes into
this promotion, this advertisement, 33% and a third percent.
I think that's entirely too much.
We ask a doctor up John, up John and company, how many employees they have.
He said you had about a little more than 5,000.
And he said there had more than 1,000 detail men.
So what I think the physicians would really appreciate would be some authentic and more
public information from the food and drug department on just what these drugs are, what
they'll do, what the side effects are, so that they can have confidence so that they
can know and won't have to rely so much on the detail men.
So I tend to get a little bit back to your home base for just a moment before we have
to close.
You have said you have not announced yet what you're going to run.
Now, it is generally the same that you will.
It's also generally the same that you probably will have strong opposition.
You honestly expect to win an election down the agency?
Well, this is definitely your trying to ask me around the bad way.
I appreciate your friendship.
My happy being a senator and that's what I'm going to try to continue being.
Well, that's the same, although this is not the time, there's enough place for me to be
making an announcement.
Well, it's only if you do announce and if you do run and if you do win, you'll
win.
I think I hope that will be a wonderful.
Do you foresee any chance in your afternoon to the future senator?
When you might again be a candidate for National Office, you think I have Mr. W.
No plans whatsoever for an election with the National Picture.
I don't mean that.
I've flattered him and somebody speaks to me enough connection.
I'm not definitely ruling yourself out in any future contingency.
Certainly, and that's a present campaign.
I have no expectation of being put before the convention in the meanwhile.
Of course, the present changes every moment, Senator.
Well, no, I think that's not very important.
Thank you very much today, sir.
I'm becoming a face to the nation and thanks also to today's news car respondents.
The Robert Roth of the Philadelphia Bulletin, Charles M. Fremde of CBS News, and Warren Duffy
of United Press International.
This is Stuart Novens.
We invite you to join us next week at a new time.
We ask that you consult your TV files to find the time in your area.
Our guest will be Paul Butler, Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, a program
today originated in Washington.
This is the CBS television network.